“And so I step up, into the darkness within; or else the light” (Atwood 295). With that, Offred’s narration within Margaret Atwood’s The Handmaid’s Tale concludes just like it commences: shrouded in ambiguity unveiling a story of palpable fear and deeply-rooted patriarchy. Peculiarly, Atwood’s provocative novel initially seems to close rather mundanely “with the “open” ending characteristic of modern fiction,...stopping the novel...leaving a phrase hanging resonantly, but ambiguously, in the air” (Lodge 224). However, Atwood swiftly and suddenly introduces Professor Pieixoto, an academic who titles and tells Offred’s story many years in the future. Almost immediately, Offred’s voice retreats into a hushed whisper, a background noise of sorts, while Pieixoto commands the crowd, his interpretation of Offred’s story in center stage; the novel transforms from a memoir to a man-made manifestation of memories laced with the Professor’s sexist humour. He even remarks, in respect to “the superscription “The Handmaid’s Tale”...all puns were intentional, particularly that having to do with the archaic vulgar signification of the word tail” (Atwood 301). His speech continues saturated with demeaning humor and general ignorance as he attempts to convey ‘Offred’s story’. While the conclusion of the novel does place Offred’s life in historical context, in fact, the Professor’s interpretation of Offred’s experiences at the conclusion increases the vagueness of Offred’s story enhancing the ambiguity of her plight while also exemplifying the extent of patriarchy in society. 
The professor’s control over the naming of the primary text and the synthesis of Offred’s narration is significant because it emphasizes the patriarchal privilege associated with men naming women, a practice also seen in Gilead; ironically, if the professor named the manuscript Offred’s Tale instead, it would still not be just because “like “Ofglen” and Ofwarren,” [Offred] was a patronymic, composed of the possessive preposition and the first name of the gentleman in question,” Pieixoto explains (Atwood 305). While he provides an accurate description of handmaid naming in Gilead, it is notable that he refers to the Commanders as “gentleman” opposed to enslavers or subjugators. Furthermore, he provides the audience with his brief, formulaic explanation of the naming process, perpetuating the notion that a name is merely an intangible label. However, during the novel, Offred says, “My name isn't Offred, I have another name, which nobody uses now because it's forbidden. I tell myself it doesn't matter, your name is like your telephone number, useful only to others; but what I tell myself is wrong, it does matter” (84). So, in fact, Offred explicitly expresses her belief that having a name, rather than a label, conveys a sense of power over yourself, yet Pieixoto describes a “name like your telephone number” solely of bureaucratic importance. Overall, his evaluation of Gileadean naming is eerily similar to the philosophy of nomenclature in Gilead itself, and his obtuse attitude towards Offred’s sentiments sits in opposition to the intimate and personal narrative she delivers.
Moreover, the curtness of Professor Pieixoto’s discourse on naming in Gilead wholly disregards how the system plays an extensive role in the dehumanization and marginalization of the handmaids. Even before discussing naming, he warns the audience to “be cautious about passing moral judgment upon the Gileadeans,” despite his extensive research into the injustices Offred and the other handmaids face (302). The method of identification is designed to remove each handmaid’s individual purpose within the society. The Gileadean “naming practices, including the paucity of terms of direct address and the lack of nicknames and terms of endearment, further [institute a] loss of community and identity” (Templin 1). Just before Offred’s first rendezvous with Fred, the Commander, she stands nervously outside of his office contemplating why he would invite her there; she knows that the handmaids are for “breeding purposes,” and that “there are to be no toeholds for love. [They] are two-legged wombs, that’s all: sacred vessels, ambulatory chalices” (Atwood 136). The Gileadean government carefully cultivates the blatant objectification of the handmaids through different systems, such as naming; after all, one does not fall in love with an object, one falls in love with a human being. 
Another paradoxical element of the novel’s conclusion is how it serves to eliminate the ambiguousness of Offred’s story, but, instead, Pieixoto seeks to end ambiguity by looking to conclude the search for Fred’s identity. The professor claims that he and his colleague focus on Fred because the name “ “Offred” gives no clue, since,..such names were taken by these women upon their entry into a connection with the household of a specific commander, and relinquished by them upon leaving it” (306). Pieixoto believes that, “through the name, the individual becomes part of the history of the society, and, because of the name, his or her deeds will exist separate from the deeds of others” (Deluzain). Because the memories of Offred’s past relationships and experiences, “her deeds,” are not Offred’s, but a woman with “another name[‘s],” he insinuates that “these women,” including Offred, exist only through the identity of their Commander. In contrast, Atwood argues that the memories of these unnamed women are important because they validate the identities of the women. 
The unanticipated conclusion of The Handmaid’s Tale deserts the “open” ending characteristic of modern fiction (Lodge 224). Through Professor Pieixoto, Atwood simultaneously highlights the sizable degree of patriarchy that remains after the downfall of Gileadean society and leaves the reader to grapple with Offred’s unclear fate. In addition, Atwood’s exploration of naming and identity warns how easily people can be replaced or altogether forgotten. Ultimately, the faux clarity of the ending punctuates the severity of the patriarchy within society and further distorts Offred’s story. 
