On a regular day in a dictatorship Gilead, Offred loses her speech as her former companion Ofglen is replaced with another Handmaid — also Ofglen. Sadly, in the eyes of the regime, the change is practically non-existent: one red dress substituted for another. As the pair finishes market shopping and the two lean toward each other for rehearsed, meaningless good byes, the pitch-black truth strikes underneath the white wings of Handmaids: “she hanged herself”, murmurs the new Ofglen about her predecessor. Interestingly, Offred’s predecessor ended her life the same way. Such is the nature of the initial stages of Gileadean regime: suppress unnecessary curiosity of the oppressed. The government aims to eliminate any certainty, any distinguishability among the Handmaids by dressing them in identical outfits, by restraining their vision with the white wings — at first, Offred did not even realize that Ofglen was replaced. Any extra knowledge guarantees a visit from the Eyes; evidently, Handmaids prefer suicide. As the novel finishes not once, but twice, the binary ending appropriately concludes the book with a certain degree of uncertainty which connotes the state of mind of the Handmaids trapped in the Gilead to the audience.
The concluding parts of the novel directly challenge the audience to accept the absence of explanation or further details, the same way the misogynistic regime challenged Offred. The formation of a totalitarian dictatorship suddenly restrains the new Handmaids of freedom of information and opportunity. While existing — rather than living — in Gilead, Offred is constantly subjected to the lack of knowledge and independence: “Whether this is my end or a new beginning I have no way of knowing”, she comments before her departure from the Commander's house in an unknown van (295). Such an ironic, equally-possible likelihood of both “end” and “beginning” in Offred’s life following her trip, or even the escalation of the former into the latter, perfectly demonstrates her unawareness. Besides, the pun of “no” and “know” further complexifies the uncertainty of her future. Interestingly, by concluding her story with an indefinite outcome, Offred effectively makes the reader experience her struggle. After hundreds of pages of thoughts, conspiracies, observations, and surprises, Offred leaves in a van, and a reader never hears from her again. Nevertheless, in a conclusion, the significance of doubt surpasses that of certainty: the absence of a definite resolution the majority of the readers has been hoping for triggers them to wonder, discuss, speculate, and most importantly — feel deceived, similarly to the Handmaids. 
The novel makes the reader feel cheated, played, tricked by Offred. Perhaps such feelings are due to the reader’s subconscious self-image in the protagonist of the book. Born in a more liberal era, Offred grew up in a household of a feminist and activist single mother. She is a middle-class white woman who worked in a library, and whose marriage initiated with an affair — a common type of an American. The central character of the novel is not too bad or too good — she is average; at least, she used to be before Gilead. Her average American life represents the lives of the audience as a whole. Based on Madonne Miner’s argument that playing with her narration “may lead us to some new understandings of the text”, every reader following Offred’s challenging track of thought constructs a personal link to her story (Miner 149). Therefore, when Offred vanishes in a van without any good byes, every reader is deprived of their own ending, too.
If the readers reach the second conclusion which is disguised under the title “Historical Notes”, even more ambiguity uncovers (Atwood 297). The last thirteen pages present a whole speech about Offred’s cassettes by a professor from the future. Three hundred pages of female struggle are followed and challenged by a dozen of Pieixoto’s “guesswork” regarding the legitimacy of Offred’s story (302). The historical notes add a “last-minute twist” to Offred’s tale, questioning the readers’ understanding of the novel and forcing them to reconsider everything Offred did not solely think, but actually said and recorded (Lodge 225). 
Such a twist also emphasizes the skepticism toward women’s words in the Gilead: Pieixoto, a male professor, rather than Offred, has a privilege to provide final assertions in the novel. His inadequate use of humor during his speech, emphasized by the frequent laughter and groans from the side of his audience, creates an impression of a post-Gileadean society full of gender inequality. He humoristically dubs a network of secret stations rescuing women “Underground Frailroad”, associating females with the word “frail” (Atwood 301). The conference attendees fail to hide laughter at such pun. His implication that women are a weaker, more fragile sex makes the reader question: “Did the republic collapse, or did it just morph into a less extreme one?” 
Even the Chair Professor Crescent Moon, who is ironically a woman, introduces the conference with nonchalant remarks about the fishing expedition and “suitable rain gear and insect repellent” (299). Such everyday things create a calm, ordinary mood, contrasted with Offred’s emotional ending a few pages back. Not a tiny hint of compassion toward the oppressed women appears throughout the conference. The readers, like Offred throughout her story, are constantly unsure: how can women be treated so unfairly solely based on their gender, age, and previous marital status?
The last paragraphs of Pieixoto’s monologue finally ruin some readers’ weak hope for a solid, concrete ending. Fortunately, the book does not conclude with “a happy one” (Lodge 224). Instead, his speech offers a paradoxical balance between informative satisfaction and ambiguity: “...so highly prized?”, “...for herself?”, “...even executed?”, Pieixoto keeps asking rhetorically, wondering about Offred’s future (Atwood 311). The abundance of question marks on the last page of the book creates an ambiguous atmosphere. Pieixoto’s last sentence “Are there any questions?” (311), followed by an infinitely blank page, coincidentally parallels Offred’s dramatic finale: “I step up, into the darkness within; or else the light” (295).  The contrast between darkness and light and the paradoxical rhetorical question without any answer once again expose the uncertainty of women’s status in both fictional Gileadean society and the apparent reality. Pieixoto’s last sentence is actually an apostrophe, since the oppressed societies — women, in the specific case of the novel — often do not get a chance to ask or reason, same as the Handmaids are even forbidden to read in the Gilead. Pieixoto also directs his question to the readers, who at last feel the Handmaids’ inability to respond. Silence, encrypted within the non-existing words on the blank page, concludes the conference. 
The absence of one definite ending opens a space to wonder and examine hidden meanings of the book. Similar to an art piece, while a novel is not finished, it’s alive: to finish a piece means to rid of it, to kill it. The audience is encouraged to construct personal connections like the ones Offred’s mind involuntarily makes to stay out of an “emotional disarray”, but stubbornly denies due to fear of an “emotional overload” (Miner 153). Same as little children following their parents, readers follow Offred’s thoughts: they grow attached to her. At the end, when Offred the “parent” vanishes, the grown up “children” face the reality of the adult life: explanations are not always provided. Offred has told her story; the readers are yet to.
